# Sports Analytics Writeup Solutions

## 3.A. Reading in Data

**ReadMatrix**

**Input:** a multi-line string where each line is a series of comma separated decimal values.

**Output:** a matrix whose $(i,j)$ entry is the $j$-th value on the $i$-th line.

1. $i \leftarrow 0$
2. $lines \leftarrow$ the sequence of lines of text from the input string
3. **foreach** $line$ in $lines$ **do**
   - $vals \leftarrow$ the sequence of string values in $line$, separated by ","
   - ${row}_i \leftarrow$ the sequence obtained by converting each element of $vals$ to a numeric value
   - $i \leftarrow i+1$
4. $M \leftarrow$ the matrix whose $i$-th row is given by ${row}_i$
5. **return** $M$

---

## 3.B. Generating Predictions

**GeneratePredictions**

**Input:**
- A linear model using $m \times 1$ matrix of weights $w$
- $n \times m$ matrix of explanatory variables $X$

**Output:** $n \times 1$ matrix $y$, the vector of wins predicted by the model when provided with the data $X$.

**return** $Xw$

---

## 3.C. Calculating Prediction Error

**PredictionError**

**Input:**
- A linear model using $m \times 1$ matrix of weights $w$
- $n \times m$ matrix of explanatory variables $X$
- $n \times 1$ matrix of actual values for the measured variable $y$

**Output:** The Mean-Squared Error between the values predicted by the model and the actual measured values.

1. $P \leftarrow$ matrix produced by $GeneratePredictions(w, X)$
2. $actual \leftarrow$ the sequence of values given by the entries of $y$
3. $predict \leftarrow$ the sequence of values given by the entries of $P$
4. **return** $MSE(actual, predict)$

---

## 3.D. Least Squares Estimate

To find the weights which minimize the MSE, we set:

$$0 = \frac{dMSE(w)}{dw} = \frac{1}{n} (2w^TX^TX - 2y^TX)$$

Multiplying both sides by $\frac{n}{2}$, we get:

$$0 = w^TX^TX - y^TX$$

Next, add $y^TX$ to both sides:

$$y^TX = w^TX^TX$$

Take the transpose of both sides:

$$(y^TX)^T = (w^TX^TX)^T$$
$$X^T(y^T)^T = X^T(X^T)^T(w^T)^T$$
$$X^Ty = X^TXw$$

Note that $X^T X$ is a square matrix. For this class, that is sufficient to say that $X^TX$ is invertible. Multiply both sides on the left by $(X^TX)^{-1}$:

$$w = (X^TX)^{-1}X^Ty$$

---

## 4. Predicting Baseball Performance

An example set of results from `run_experiment` are below. Note that these values will vary based on the number of iterations and the specific $\lambda$ values. These were taken with 1000 iterations.

```
Created LS model:
Error on training data: 93.7399686198
Error on test data: 105.085529062

Created LASSO model; param = 1000
Error on training data: 122.276503446
Error on test data: 102.905342202

Created LASSO model; param = 10000
Error on training data: 132.466747807
Error on test data: 91.6523530676

Created LASSO model; param = 100000
Error on training data: 141.102461146
Error on test data: 95.3218714614
```

---

## 5. Discussion

Examining the sizes of the matrices, we see that $y^TXw$ results in a $(1 \times n)(n \times m)(m \times 1) = (1 \times 1)$ matrix. Thus $y^TXw$ is symmetric, so $y^TXw = (y^TXw)^T = w^TX^T(y^T)^T = w^TX^Ty$.

$\lambda$ represents the tradeoff between error and complexity. If $\lambda=0$, then $MSE(w) + 0 \cdot \left\lVert w \right\rVert_1 = MSE(w)$. In this case, value to be minimized is only the error; the complexity of the weights is entirely ignored. As $\lambda$ increases, the complexity of the weights becomes increasingly significant in the value to be minimized. In this situation, the weight vector will be less accurate on the training data, but it will also be less complex. LASSO does this by setting more and more weights to $0$ as $\lambda$ increases.

The weights generated by the Least-Squares method on the training data produced the lowest Mean-Squared Error on the training data. However, the weights which best predicted the new test data were the weights generated by the LASSO method. $\lambda$ values around 10000 lead to the most accurate predictions on the test data. From this, we can conclude that matching historical data closest does *not* lead to the most accurate predictions of future data. Weights which are simpler are actually much better predictors; complex weights are vulnerable to overfitting the training data (meaning that they are too well matched to the idiosyncrasies of the training data, rather than just picking out the important features) at the expense of predictive power on new data.

Note that this is one of the key ideas that we would like you to take away from this assignment. A predictor is not trying to predict the results that you already know. So, you do not necessarily want your predictor to be perfectly suited for the training data. Instead, you want it to pick out the important features so that it will be a good predictor for data that you haven't seen yet!

The LASSO algorithm is designed to set many of the weights to 0. These 0 weights correspond to statistics which are unimportant; statistics corresponding to 0 weights are completely ignored when predicting the number of future wins. For example, when $\lambda = 10000$ we see that the number of triples hit by the team has weight set to 0 and thus is unimportant.
