# Assignment 2: Three Interpreters for Jam

## Overview

**Testing:** Use `bin/grade` or the `grade` tool to run the test suite.

**Prerequisite:** This assignment builds on Assignment 1. The provided files include a complete solution to Assignment 1's Parser.java. You may use your own parser if you prefer, but ensure the `map` construct accepts an empty parameter list.

**Task** Your task is to write three interpreters for the *Jam* language syntax from Project 1: one that performs *call-by-value* evaluation, one that performs *call-by-name* evaluation, and one that performs *call-by-need* evaluation. The input to your interpreter will be a Jam program in the abstract syntax generated by the parser from Project 1. Call-by-need evaluation has the same syntactic semantics as call-by-name but the implementation of call-by-need is an "optimization" of call-by-name, so we must explain call-by-name evaluation first. The difference between call-by-value evaluation and call-by-name evaluation is straightforward. Consider a syntactic semantics for Jam analogous to the one we gave in Lecture 4 for the language LC. In the subsequent discussion of Jam evaluation, we will call Jam `map`s *procedures* which is consistent with language-independent programming language terminology. Similarly, in LC, `lambda`-abstractions are procedures. In call-by-value evaluation, the arguments in a procedure application (class `App` in the Java representation of Jam abstract syntax) are reduced to values before the arguments are substituted into the procedure body. In call-by-name evaluation, the argument expressions are substituted into the procedure body *without* being evaluated! These argument expressions are evaluated if and when their values are demanded during the evaluation of the body. This difference is codified by the reduction rules for procedure applications.

In call-by-value,

```
(map x1,…,xn to E) (V1,…,Vn) → E[x1 ← V1,...,xn ← Vn]
```

where `V1,…,Vn` are *values*. Hence, the procedure body in an application is not evaluated until the arguments are reduced to values.

In call-by-name,

```
(map x1,…,xn to E) (M1,…,Mn) → E[x1 ← M1,...,xn ← Mn]
```

where `M1,…,Mn` are *arbitrary expressions*. This rule performs the substitution immediately rather than reducing `M1,…,Mn` to values first.

Since call-by-name defers the evaluation of arguments in procedure applications, some of those arguments may never be evaluated in some cases. As a result, there are Jam programs that converge to an answer for call-by-name but diverge or abort with an error for call-by-value (because an argument in a function application that is never demanded in call-by-name evaluation diverges or aborts in call-by-value evaluation).

For the sake of efficiency, your interpreter must be a "meta-interpreter" that maintains an environment of variable bindings instead of performing explicit substitutions. In the environment, each variable must be bound to a representation that can be evaluated on demand. **Warning**: beware of scoping problems in your call-by-name interpreter. *Make sure that you evaluate each argument expression in the proper environment.* **Hint**: it may be helpful to think of each argument expression as a procedure of no arguments. If you use the correct representation for call-by-name bindings, the implementation of call-by-name requires very little code and the call-by-name and call-by-value interpreters can share most of their code.

We recommend that you use the generic `PureList` class in PureList.java to represent an environment.

**Call-by-need** The call-by-name approach to evaluation is wasteful because it re-evaluates an argument expression *every* time the corresponding parameter is evaluated. By using the list representation for environments and performing destructive operations on the data representation of bindings (name/value pairs) in the environment, it is possible to eliminate this wasteful practice and only evaluate each argument expression once, the first time its value is demanded. (Note that the side-effects of mutating of the environment are benign. The behavior of the API supported by the environment does not change--only the efficiency of the implementation changes. This evaluation protocol is called *call-by-need*. For functional languages like Jam, there is no difference in the observable behavior or call-by-name and call-by-need, except that the latter is generally more efficient.

**Testing** You are expected to write unit tests for all of your non-trivial methods or functions *and submit your test code as part of your program*. For more information, refer back to Project 1. Since there is no straightforward way to inspect closures or environments (without presuming a particular implementation), the direct output of environments or closures will not be tested. We can still however indirectly test closures by testing the application of closures to arguments and observing the arity of closures, e.g., `arity(map x to x)`.

The visible part (for testing) of your program must include the top-level class: `Interpreter` containing the methods

```java
JamVal callByValue()
JamVal callByName()
JamVal callByNeed()
```

The interface `JamVal` is defined in the provided support files.

The `Interpreter` class must support two constructors: `Interpreter(String filename)` which takes input from the specified file and `Interpreter(Reader inputStream)` which takes input from the specified Reader. You do not need to test the constructor that takes a `String filename` argument. Store your source program in a file named Interpreter.java. In summary, you should create a source file Interpreter.java matching the following template:

```java
/** file Interpreter.java **/

class EvalException extends RuntimeException {
    EvalException(String msg) { super(msg); }
}

class Interpreter {
    Interpreter(String fileName) throws IOException;
    Interpreter(Reader reader);

    public JamVal callByValue() { ... };
    public JamVal callByName() { ... };
    public JamVal callByNeed() { ... };
}
```

The file Interp.java in your repository already contains the preceding code.

**Choice of Language** Your program must compile and run correctly using Java 8.

## Input Language Specification

The following paragraphs define the *Jam* subset that your interpreter should handle and the new parser's input language.

Your interpreter should accept the *Jam* language including:

* the unary operators `+`, `-` and `~`;
* the binary operators `>`, `>=`, `!=`, `+`, `-`, `/`, `*`, `=`, `<`, `<=`, `&` and `|`; and
* the primitive Jam operations `cons?`, `empty?`, `number?`, `function?`, `arity`, `list?`, `cons`, `first`, and `rest`.

The supported operators have exactly the same meaning as their Scheme counterparts (where the unary operator `~` is identified with the Scheme `not` function, and the binary operators `&` and `|` are identified with the Scheme `and` and `or` operators) with two exceptions:

* `/` means the integer division,
* `=` and `!=` mean equality and inequality on arbitrary objects.

The binary operator `=` behaves exactly like the Scheme `equal?` function, i.e. structural equality for objects and identity for closures (functions). For closures, the only way that functions can be equal is if they are actually the same object, i.e. they were created by the same closure allocation.

Some instructive examples of Jam semantics include:

* `5 = 5` evaluates to `true`
* `5 = 6` evaluates to `false`
* `cons(1,cons(2,empty))=cons(1,cons(2,empty))` evaluates to `true`
* `cons(1,cons(2,empty))=cons(1,cons(3,empty))` evaluates to `false`
* `cons(1,cons(2,empty))=cons(1,empty)` evaluates to `false`
* `cons? = cons?` evaluates to `true`
* `cons? = empty?` evaluates to `false`
* `cons? = (map x to x)` evaluates to `false`
* `(map x to x) = (map x to x)` evaluates to `false`, because the two maps are distinct objects in memory.
* `let m:=(map x to x); in m = m` evaluates to `true` in call-by-value because the right-hand side of the definition is evaluated once, and from that point on `m` refers to the same object; to `false` in call-by-name, because the right-hand side is evaluated each time `m` is used, so the two objects being compared are not created during the same allocation; and to `true` in call-by-need, because the right-hand side of the definition is evaluated the first time `m` is used and from then on refers to that object. This apparent anomaly does not contradict the theorem asserting that call-by-name and call-by-need yield identical results for functional languages because the `=` operator is not purely functional in Jam. It treats procedure (function) values as locations rather than mathematical functions because function equality is undecidable.
* The equality operation defined on closures in the two bullets above has implications on the equality of lists: you have to compare two lists item by item using Jam `=`.

By Scheme, we mean the *intermediate language with lambda* as typically used in introductory programming language courses.

The preceding definition of equality for closures is what is commonly done in languages like Scheme, Java, and C#, but it is unappealing from a mathematical perspective. In these languages, many common algebraic transformations break if closures are involved. There are more elegant ways to define equality on closures but they are more expensive. If we "flatten" closure representations so that a closure consists of a lambda-expression (AST `map`) M and a list of the bindings of the free variables in M, then we can compare the lambda-expressions (as ASTs) and the bindings of the free variables (recursively invoking equality testing of objects). For this assignment, we are using the common, inelegant definition which is easy to implement. Statically-typed functional languages typically exclude functions from the domain of the `=` operator; programs that attempt to compare functions do not type check.

The meanings of the primitive functions are as follows:

* `cons?(p)` returns `true` if `p` was created by `cons()`. Hence, `cons?(empty) = false`.
* `empty?(p)` returns `true` if `p` is `empty` (the empty list).
* `number?(p)` returns `true` if `p` is a number
* `function?(p)` returns `true` if `p` is a function (i.e., a `map` or a primitive function)
* `list?(p)` returns `true` if `p` is a list (anything constructed by `cons()`, and `empty`)
* `arity(p)` returns how many parameters the function `p` takes. It returns an evaluation error if `p` is not a function.
* `cons(p,q)` returns a list consisting of the list `q` with the value `p` added to the front. It returns an evaluation error if `q` is not a list.
* `first(p)` returns the first element of list `p`. It returns an evaluation error if `p` is not a list.
* `rest(p)` returns all but the first element of `p`. It returns an evaluation error if `p` is not a list.

For all other inputs, the predicates (boolean-returning functions) above return `false`.

The language constructs `if`, `map`, `let`, and application in JAM have the same meaning as `if`, `lambda`, `let`, and application in Racket/Scheme with two exceptions. First, the call-by-name version of Jam uses call-by-name semantics for the application of program-defined functions (`map`s). Second, when Jam `if` is given a non-Boolean input in the test position, it reports an evaluation error.

Your interpreter should report errors by throwing an `EvalException` containing an appropriate message. All errors abort execution.

The Jam `let` construct is simply an abbreviation for the corresponding lambda application. Hence

```
let v1 := M1;
    ...
    vn := Mn;
in E
```

has exactly the same meaning as

```
(map v1, ..., vn to E)(M1, ..., Mn)
```

Hence, a `let` is a combination of a `map` and an application. Note that the semantics of `let` depends on whether the interpreter is using call-by-value or call-by-name.

Lists are created using `cons` and `empty`, where `empty` is the empty list. The one-element list `(1)` is created by the expression `cons(1,empty)`. Since the values returned by `cons(...)` and `empty` are lists, `list?` returns `true` for both of them. The following program evaluates to `cons(true,cons(true,empty))`:

```
cons(list?(cons(5,empty)),cons(list?(empty),empty))
```

The binary infix operators `&` ("and") and `|` ("or") denote the *short-circuit* versions of those operations even in call-by-value Jam. The evaluation of primitive operations is not affected by the policy for evaluating `map` applications. That means these operations look just at their first operand and try to determine the result; only if they cannot determine it from just the first operand do they look at the second operand. For example, `(true | x)` evaluates to `true` regardless of what value `x` has.

The ternary `if-then-else` operation works in a similar way: It first evaluates the test expression appearing between `if` and `then`. If it evaluates to `true`, `if-then-else` evaluates the consequence expression immediately following `then`; if it is `false`, it evaluates the alternative expression immediately following `else`. `if-then-else` never evaluates both the consequence and alternative expressions.

## Representation of Program Values

A Jam program manipulates data values that are either numbers, booleans, lists, or function representations (closures). To standardize the visible behavior of Jam interpreters, we stipulate that Jam interpreters *must* observe the following conventions concerning the representation of Jam values in Java. Jam values must be represented using the `JamVal` interface and subclasses as defined in each of the three parser library files.

## Testing Your Program

The provided code includes some JUnit4 test classes which are not comprehensive. You need to add more test cases; you should check every base constant (other than all numbers) and every compound construction as shown in the syntax diagrams.

Each procedure or method in your program should include a short `javadoc` comment stating precisely what it does at the level of abstraction expected by clients of the method.

Your test suite should comprehensively test all the distinct constructions of data values of the primary type processed by each method. Each combination of inputs requiring different processing should be tested. Ideally, the suite of tests should probe every feasible control path in your code.

## Implementation Hints

In your call-by-name interpreter, the argument expressions must be evaluated in the environment corresponding to their lexical context in the program. The free variables in argument expressions behave *exactly* like the free variables in functions.

The form of your interpreters should be very similar to the environment-based interpreters presented in class. You should represent ground values by their `Object` equivalents (where lists are represented using the `PureList` class in the parser library file) and function values (closures) as anonymous inner classes (the strategy pattern for representing functions). Implement each of the primitives using the corresponding Java primitive when possible. Of course, you will have to implement the `function?` and `arity` primitives on your own since there are no Java equivalents. Fortunately, this task is straightforward.

Your interpreters should return the Java data values (`JamVal`s or aborting `Exception`s) representing the results of the specified Jam computations.

Note that unary and binary operators are *not* values while primitives are. Unary and binary operators are not legal expressions; hence, they can never be used as values. In addition, note that the binary operators `&` and `|` are special: they do not evaluate their second arguments unless it is necessary. Of course, a Jam programmer can always define `map`s that define the functions corresponding to operators.

In writing your interpreters: follow the definition of the data. Your interpreters should contain a separate `visitor for<class-name>` method for each abstract syntax constructor type.

Remember to "factor out" repeated code patterns which you presumably learned in Comp 215 and/or Comp 310.

Initially confine your attention to a small subset of the primitive operations first (such as integer arithmetic including a few relational operators) and get everything debugged for that subset. Develop an interpreter for this subset that only handles programs without program-defined functions (`map`s). Then extend that interpreter to support the call-by-value evaluation of `map`s followed by adding support for call-by-name and call-by-need. In the process, share code using inheritance wherever possible. When you implement each interpreter as an AST visitor, you can share most of the code across the three interpreters using inheritance. (If you write your interpreter by filling in the stub file, this sharing will automatically happen.) Once all three interpreters are working for the selected subset of operations, add support for the operations that you initially left out. You can initially ignore the commented out tests in `Assign2Test.java` and run them after your interpreter works for all simple tests. The tests in `Assign2Test.java` are a minimal set of demonstration tests. You need to thoroughly test your program achieving a high level of code coverage (80% is a good target, but perhaps you can do significantly better).

This is a more challenging assignment than Assignment 1. The stub file `Interp.java` corresponds to a coherent design that achieves a high degree of code sharing. If you construct a solution by filling in the stubbed methods, you only have to write about 200 lines of code. Developing these lines requires understanding all of the code in the starter files.

The provided code compiles without generating any errors or warnings, but it fails every test in `Assign2Test.java` with a null pointer exception because many of the methods required to interpret Jam code are stubbed out. Some tests in `Assign2Test.java` are commented out because they involve a higher level of complexity, namely the use of the Y combinator to perform recursion. Assignment 2 Jam has no mechanism for directly specifying recursive bindings (e.g., recursive function definitions), but the Y operator easily works around this restriction. Once your interpreters work for the simple tests, uncomment the tests that use the Y operator and confirm that your interpreter works for these more involved computations.

You are welcome to completely rewrite the code for `Interp.java`, but we expect your code to be clean, intelligible and commented with contracts for all non-trivial methods.

---
*COMP 411: Principles of Programming Languages, Rice University*
